question sorry
I know I'm working out but I'm not
walking around I will be here on
Thursday so as much as I sympathize with
the organizers and I think that they
really have a very valid point they have
raised very valid points I also feel
that my job is to be here so I will be
here on Thursday any other questions
perhaps it was more important next
Thursday we'll have our first midterm
exam okay yeah everybody's excited so I
already put an announcement on the beach
paste page which by the way you should
check bSpace site because there are all
kinds of there's all kinds of
interesting stuff in there and useful
information also
so homework solutions something I have
already told you about but also there
will be some information about the exam
I'm going to this week I'm going to post
a mock midterm so that you will have a
chance to practice for the midterm and
we'll have a review lecture next Tuesday
a week from today and exam isn't
Thursday exactly during the class hour
one hour 20 minutes more precisely so
we'll start at 3:40 and finish at 5:00
because this room is not big enough you
know because with everybody be packed so
I have requested another room so we'll
have to separate into two groups I will
I will post information about this and I
will tell you about this and everything
about this on Thursday or next Tuesday
okay and now I go back to what we talked
about last week which is a limit I just
want to say a few words about limits and
then we will move on to the next subject
which is partial derivatives so about
the limit
too many late arrivals today I'm going
to charge a late arrival tax if this
continues so it's just quiet a little
bit because you know but it will be good
for everybody if we are more focused
okay so limit I use traded limits by by
way of an example and I looked at the
particular function in two variables
namely x squared divided by x squared
plus y squared near XY equals zero zero
and the reason is that at this point the
pneuma the denominator becomes equal to
0 and so this expression becomes
problematic it may or may not have a
limit if we did not have that if for
example we looked at this function near
a point XY equals 1 0 1 1 a point where
the denominator is not equal to 0 that
would be an easy question to handle but
precisely when the the denominator is
becomes equal to 0 we have to be careful
and we have to analyze it to more
precise and so in this particular case I
explained that this function doesn't
have a limit this function does not have
a limit at this point and I explained I
explained this explain the reason the
reason is that we could find the reason
I gave was that I show two different
paths
two different paths on the XY plane
which approach zero one was the past
when X is equal to zero so it's a green
arrow and the other one was the path
when y is equal to zero and that's a red
arrow and we have seen that along the
first path when as X is equal to zero
when we look at this function on this
path very close to zero but not quite
equal to zero what we get is you know is
zero divided by zero plus y squared but
as I said we really look at it not at
this point but just near this point so
near this point Y is not zero so this is
not zero
near the point because it's near the
point we can actually evaluate this and
we see that for all values of y near
this point this is actually just plain
zero because you divide 0 by something
nonzero and so this means that the
longest path this path there is a limit
and the physical to zero all the other
hand if we look at this path we get x
squared divided by x squared plus zero
and again we will assume that X is very
close to zero but not quite zero yet so
this is actually nonzero expression and
therefore we can cancel them out so this
again is nonzero and this actually gives
us one so that means that along this
path again there is a limit along this
path there exists a limit there is a
limit
along this path namely one so we have
found two paths along which we achieve a
different limit we obtain different
limits that means that the function
itself does not have a limit you see it
does not have a limit because to say
that the function has a limit function
has a limit if along any path
approaching the point the limit exists
and all of them are the same in this
particular case clearly they are not the
same because there are two paths at
least to pass along which the limits are
different so so how can it be that a
function has different limits along
different paths in other words what is
the meaning of this what is the
geometric representation of it well to
explain that we can already we can
already see an analogue of this
phenomenon for functions in one variable
which I explained last time in the case
of one variable we look at the graph of
a function as a graph as a geometric
representation and we can we can have
the following situation where the graph
is discontinuous grab the same and grab
the same color so graphic this continues
for example like this so there is some
point x0 and if you approach from the
left you're going to end up at this
point and if this value and if your
purse on the right end up at this this
value
so that means that function does not
have a limit at this point okay because
a long different path you get different
limits they are both finite so in some
sense you can say you can argue that
it's a more benign situation then let's
say a situation of a hyperbola where
actually goes to infinity here by the
way on the right it goes to plus meeting
each and left goes to minus infinity so
in some sense it's even worse than just
going to infinity it actually goes to
two different infinities in some sense
right but first of all as long as if it
goes to infinity along any path it's
already it we already say it doesn't
have a limit but even if it's finite
this situation which is in some sense
more benign it still doesn't have a
limit it has a limit from the left has a
limit from the right in the case of one
variable that there are only two
possible paths which converge to this
point well you can go sort of a
different with different speed different
velocity but doesn't matter I mean
they're geometrically the same path
either this one or this one only two and
already that creates trouble in the case
of functions in two variable there are
many more paths I have drawn to pass
here here is one here is another but you
have many more right you also have a
path like this finally a path doesn't
have to be straight line it could be a
spiral you know so there are many many
different paths and that's the
difference between two variables in one
variable to say that the function has a
limit for a function in two variables is
a very strong statement it's a statement
that along any of those paths you're
going to achieve the same limit so this
actually shows that in a way it's much
easier to it's much easier to disprove
something here to show that the function
does not have a limit then to show that
the function does have a limit indeed to
to show that it doesn't have a limit
it's sufficient to just exhibit two
different paths along which you have
different limits and usually it's pretty
clear which ones you should take for
example in this case you just look at x
equals 0 y equals zero sometimes you
might might need to look at a linear
path
like this one where X is equal to Y
again to convince yourself that that
indeed the function doesn't have a limit
but to prove that actually the function
does have a limit is much more difficult
because it wouldn't be enough for
example to say that the limit along this
path and along this path is the same you
would also need to show the limit along
this path is the same and along
infinitely many other paths right so to
show that it's the have the limit is
more difficult and this is not a very
efficient way to show it it is very
efficient this way of argument is very
efficient to show that it does not have
a limit because then it's enough to show
just two for which the limits are
different but to show that it has a
limit it wouldn't be enough to show that
along two paths you get the same answer
you have to show that the same goes for
all paths okay so for for practical
purposes what you need to know is the
argument showing that it doesn't doesn't
exist
you need to show you need to know this
way of argument when the limit does
exist you should be able to demonstrate
that there exists two paths along which
the limits are different okay yes yes
the distance right the distance what
really matters is the distance to what
should matter for function so the
question is when I what what really
matters the shape of the spiral the
shape of the curve or the angle it
depends on a situation right the point
is that to have a limit it means that as
soon as you get close say within 1 1 1
over 100 of an inch you know over the of
the origin the answer is going to be
within some small neighborhood of the
value that you claim is the limit it
doesn't matter how you approach it
should be within that limit if it's 1
over 1000 of an inch it should be even
closer to 100 million should be even
closer and so on right so the notion of
a limit should not rely on the way you
approach it should be about it should be
uniform with respect to all directions
and all points in the neighborhood of
the point of the point zero zero you see
so you know in a sense this argument
that I gave you it's kind of misleading
it's a very nice argument to disprove
the existence of lengths to show that
limit does not exist but it is
misleading if you try to think of in
this way about the existence of limits
okay so for existence of limits there
are you have to use a different kind of
argument and now I'm not going to
require that on the exam but I'm going
to just give you just to give you an
idea how it works I'm going to explain
it in the following case suppose you
have a function which is just slightly
different from on from this
at first glance namely instead of X
square I will take X cube you see so
what happened so the problem here the
problem with this function was that both
numerator and denominator had degree 2
so both numerator and denominator in
some sense are going to 0 at roughly the
same speed but not exactly it depends on
which along which direction you go if
you go on this one it will be 0 along
this one is 1 along this one for example
if X is equal to Y you can see it's
going to be 1/2 you see but because the
powers are the same that's why you are
end up with different answers what
happens now is that I put the numerator
I choose as the numerator X to the X to
the third power and the third power goes
to 0 much faster than second power so
that's why this will dominate and it
will kill this guy so it will it will
become 0 this is it as well it's fairly
killed because they both go to 0 so in
some sense it goes faster to 0 so it
doesn't really kill it but anyway it
depends on your point of view so how
would I show that this actually has a
limit so I claim my claim that this
function does have a limit at 0 0 namely
maybe the limit is equal to 0 how would
I show that well for that I would
actually have to estimate the value of
this function I would have to estimate
the value of this function when I
approach 0 so I will say let's suppose
so let me explain so let me explain it
as a suppose that that's why I within
belong to the to the small disc of some
radius R
and I purposefully don't want to use
Delta and epsilon not because I don't
like Greek alphabet but because I know
that people immediately feel violated
when I when I try to when I try to talk
about epsilon and Delta so I might as
well I think I use a different letter
you you will feel much more comfortable
of some of you will feel more
comfortable the resistant the way it
sounds actually one of the students told
me that when he that it reminds him of
going to dentist office I have some
Delta so let's let's call it R and let's
look at the disk of radius R and drawing
it light as a big as a big disk but
actually you should think of it as very
small I just magnify it so this is dr
and i want to look at all the points
here and i want to estimate i want to
estimate this value of this function for
all points within this disk so the
function as i explained already many
times is a rule which assigns to each of
these points is a certain number which
is the value of the function right so
that's the function f of x1 and i want
to estimate the value of the function
and what i want to show is that the
closer i get here the closer i'm going
to get to the neighborhood to the
neighborhood of 0 of the 0 value on this
line so how do I have how can I estimate
well what does it mean that it belongs
to this it means that x squared square
root of x squared plus y squared is less
than or equal to R right that's what it
means because that's the distance that's
how we measure the distance to zero to
belong to a disk of radius R means that
for your coordinates x and y the square
root of x squared plus y squared is less
than or equal to R so that means that x
squared plus y squared is less than or
equal to R squared but you see both of
these are positive so if the x squared
plus y squared the together are less
than R squared this also implies that x
squared is less than R squared right and
so X is actually less than or equal to R
this is actually also clear
geometrically because if you have all
points in the disk you will see that all
of them will have the x coordinate less
than R except for the two and two sort
of points which lie on the intersection
of the circle with the x axis so I know
this as soon as my point is in dr and i
also know this right so now what i would
like to do
I would like to write the following I
would like to write X cubed divided by x
squared plus y squared and I want to
measure the absolute value what matters
is the absolute value when I say it's
close to zero it doesn't have to be
positive or negative it should be very
close to zero on either side so that's
why to estimate it's better to take the
absolute value rather than judge the
value and so now I want to write it like
this
I want to write as x times x squared
divided by x squared plus y squared I've
done nothing I just pulled one X out of
the out of this fraction and then I want
to write it as x times x squared divided
by x squared plus y squared right so now
I want to look at this and clearly this
is less than or equal to one because in
the numerator I have a squared button
denominator I have a squared plus y
squared and this guy is always positive
or zero so the largest value that can
attain is one when when Y squared 0 but
if Y square is nonzero this will the
numerator will be strictly less than
denominator so the fraction is less than
or equal to 1 and X as I have just
explained is less than are less than or
equal to R so that means that the whole
thing the whole thing is less than or
equal to R so you see I have been able
to effectively estimate the value of
this function I cannot find it for all x
and y I mean they're all different for
different x and y but I can say for sure
that as long as x and y as long as the
point XY is within that disc of radius R
the value is going to be less than R or
less than or less than or equal to it
doesn't matter so that means that if I
make this disc smaller and smaller in
other words as I take R closer and
closer to 0 this value of the function
well more precisely the absolute value
of the of the function will will also
tend to zero right because for all
points within that this all points this
value is going to be less than or equal
to R and I have control over R because I
can I can take my points in a smaller
and smaller disk we see nowhere in this
argument am I talking about party
particular path approaching zero I'm
talking about the entire disk of radius
R and then I'm squeezing that disk and
taking smaller and smaller and smaller
and by being able to use this estimate I
can control the value as a function of
the radius I can say that if I am within
the radius you know one inch the value
of the function is going to be less than
one if I'm within radius one over one
hundred of an inch is going to the less
than 100 one of a million in other words
I can get as close as I want to zero for
the value by choosing sufficiently small
disk and that's the argument that's the
proof that this function has a limit and
the limit is equal to zero and that's
what traditionally mathematicians
explain in the epsilon-delta language
but that's all it is that's all it is
it's just saying that if you take a disk
of radius R then the value of the
function for all points within that disk
is going to be less than R or less than
something which becomes smaller with our
you see so that's not the argument are
there any questions about this yes
that's right in general it will it will
not necessarily be our it could be less
suppose I proved let's what I had a
different function remember I had two
times X cube then I would prove the
class and two are that would still be ok
because I have to get something which
will become smaller and smaller as R
becomes smaller or if I get R to the
one-half square root of R I would also
be okay or R squared it will not be okay
if I just say that it's less than one
the typical that the whole thing is less
than one that would help me that would
just tell me that I get within a certain
width within a certain range but that
range doesn't get smaller as the domain
gets smaller I have to make sure that
the range will get smaller as the domain
gets smaller and that's the perfect
that's a perfect situation where I
didn't have to make any adjustment it
just I get R on the nose as as the
estimate and the largest possible value
for this okay another question with that
only work yeah well this is a simpler
the question is it is whether this is a
general argument this is not a general
case because in general you're going to
have maybe some polynomial and x and y's
with additional terms i have really
looked at the simplest case Oh
but in general you the argument is going
to be very similar and if you if you
like in the book there are there are
more examples of this type which are
analyzed but as I said I'm not going to
require you to know this so my point
here is just to give you an idea of how
this kind of proof works and I think
that even though this is a simple
example it already illustrates this idea
okay yes
look the cows rule well what does rule
is really specific to functions in one
variable because you have to
differentiate right so logical question
was about l'hopital's rule which was one
of a powerful methods to finding limits
in for functions in one variable and
so the way it works is that if you have
if you have a function which is say P of
X divided by Q of X and both of this 10
to 0 say and you don't know what the
limit is you can estimate the limit by
taking derivatives right so now the
situation is different because now we
have this is one variable okay and now
we have two variables and in two
variables we have functions in two let's
say P of XY and Q of XY so let's say I
wanted to generalize this I would have
to take some sort of derivative here
right and this actually brings out the
question which we need to study next
which is what kind of derivatives can we
do for functions in two and three
variables right so clearly there isn't a
single very derivative because
derivative is about the rate of change
right the rate of change in one
dimensional case there is only one
direction in which you can change your
variables you can increase that you know
we can just go away from X apart from
the fact that you can change it going
left and right there is essentially only
one way to change it more precisely
there is only one degree of freedom that
you can change you can only change in
one direction but in two variables there
are more directions in which you can
change and estimate the rate of change
and therefore there are many more
derivatives that are possible so in fact
this is very close to what we discussed
up to now there are so many different
ways to approach zero that we and we
have to we have to be able to take care
of all of them right so what l'hopital's
rule in two dimensions would give us at
best it's a way to approximate the limit
along a particular direction right so
let's say if I were to take the
derivative back to the X direction then
I would be estimating the what happens
when I approach along this line and if I
were to take the derivatives back to why
I would be estimating along the green
line along the y axis
but neither would give me the full
picture the full picture I can only get
as I have argued by sort of looking all
paths right and looking at all possible
directions so in that sense the locked
outs rule doesn't help us now sometimes
sometimes it happens that you can
convert this function that you have in
two variables into a function one
variable one of the exercises I think
it's the last one on homework is about
this where you can use polar coordinates
to realize that the function you have
it's something like X involves x squared
plus y squared so I think it's something
like lobe area from of x squared Y
squared times x squared plus y squared
something like this so you realize that
actually it only looks like it's a
function two variables but actually it's
a function in one variable namely this
and then you are back to one variable
case and then it becomes a fair game to
use all the methods that methods that
you know in one variable case a general
function is not going to be like this
right
for example this one is not like this so
so I cannot directly use I cannot
directly use l'hopital's rule for two
variables and there isn't any obvious
way to use it because there is more than
one possible derivative okay so which
actually brings brings brings up the
question as to what are possible
derivatives for functions in two
variable and that's our next subject
[Applause]
so I have already kind of alluded to to
the answer because there are two
variables we can actually differentiate
with respect either one of them and we
get a meaningful derivative and these
are called partial derivatives partial
derivative so what are what are partial
derivatives so we have a function let's
say we have a function f of X Y in two
variables and when we talk about
derivatives it we should first of all we
should fix the point should fix the
point at which we are taking the
derivative right because for a different
point you'll have different derivative
it's the same thing happens same thing
happens in a four functions in one
variable so let's say we have a point
which has coordinates a and B what we
can do is we can convert this function
into function one variable but by
freezing one of the variables freeze one
of the variables
so for example we can say Y is equal to
B trees the second variable and say that
Y variable Y is equal to B which is that
the second coordinate of this point so
what we get then is a f of X and B and
let me indicate the fact that I would
have frozen I have frozen this by red so
red would be a fixed value so here also
will be put them in red indicate that
these are numbers like 1 or 5 or or 27
over 11 whatever you want right but X is
the variable so X we can plug in any
number you want and you'll get an answer
so you want to view it till as a
function but because you have frozen one
of the two variables there's only one
variable that's remaining therefore what
you get is the function in one variable
only function in one variable and once
we get a function in one variable we can
then differentiate it just in usual way
how we differentiate functions in one
variable differentiate it so we'll get
say G prime and then we can substitute
the value that we want it value a
so then finally we get a number so in
other words we had a function in two
variables first we freeze one of the two
variables and then we take the
derivative with respect to the second
variable at a particular value of that
variable namely a so the result of this
is what's called the first the first
partial derivative or partial
derivatives back to X partial derivative
with respect to X at this point at the
point a B okay and the notation for this
is f sub X of a B likewise I could
freeze the second variable I mean the
world's first variable X I could say X
is equal to a then I get a function
again in one variable where the first
variable is frozen but the second one is
free so I get a function one variable
let's call it h and then I can
differentiate it so what I get is this H
prime of B and that's called the partial
derivative here partial derivative with
respect to Y for which the notation I'm
just I'm just abbreviating the same
sentence as I have at the top of this
board then a patient for this is
obviously F sub y right I have sub y
Oh baby so so we got we got two
derivatives for functions in two
variables first and second now so let's
let's let's look at the example what
this looks like let's say f of X Y is X
to the 5 plus X times y cubed plus
cosine X times e to the Y and we would
like to find partial derivatives now
when I define them when I define them
I was insisting that the value of that
that the derivative has to be evaluated
for particular values of a and B oh
sorry
particular values of x and y which are
denoted by a and B just like in the case
of function one variable let's say if
you have a function the table function
function one variable say f of X is
equal to X cubed I could say that F
prime for for any value a will be a well
will be create 3 a squared right
that's the rule because I know the rule
the rule is that the derivative of X
cube is 3 times x squared and then if I
substitute x equals a then I get this so
usually we don't write it like this
usually we just write f prime of X is x
squared in other words we would like to
look at not just one value with
derivative for particular value of x
namely a but for all at all of them for
all possible values of X we would like
to know what the value of the derivative
is and then we can substitute substitute
x equals a for example one half then you
will get I'm sorry I forgot 3 3 x
squared and no one corrects me or at
least I I did here three x squared of
course for the function and we
substitute x equals a and we get 3 a
squared but it's too is too pedantic to
go this long way each time and say well
what if I ask what is the root of this
function you'd say well for a given
value a the derivative at the point a is
going to be 3a squared instead we just
write f prime of X is 3x squared and
that what is understood is that if I
want the value at a particular for
particular a I'll just plug a into this
formula and I'll get the answer right so
we will use the same shorthand for
partial derivatives in other words will
not mean I will not be writing each time
that FX of a B I will just write I will
just write FX of X Y I'll just write or
just FX sometimes and that would be a
function of x and y so that if I
substitute a instead of X B instead of Y
I will get the value of the derivative
of this particular partial derivative at
that point so let's see how it works in
this in this case in fact in fact
nothing could be easier you just look at
this function
in order to and in order to calculate
the partial derivatives back to X you
just view you Y as a parameter but not a
variable not very not very which is
exactly what I meant when I said that we
freeze the freeze Y it just means that
we view Y's with a parameter okay and
then you just differentiy what
differentiate what we see what do you
see you see X to the 5 so you get 5 X to
the 4 plus its range this is y cube +
differentiate this you get negative sign
x times e to the Y and that's it that's
the answer let's say that's the way you
write the answer now if you want if you
are given some x and y some values for x
and y like a and b you can substitute
them and you'll get a number but in fact
you can view this first partial
derivative with respect to x as a
function of x and y which is just
obtained in this way
likewise with you acts as a parameter
and then take the derivative with
respect to Y so if X is the parameter
then from this point of view this is
just a constant right it's independent
of Y therefore its derivative is zero
right so it's going to be zero plus here
it's also parameter so we just
differentiate Y cube so we get 3 X Y
squared cosine X is also constant in the
derivative of e to the Y is e to the Y
so that's the answer put it for the
second possibility is that clear yeah so
this is really straightforward you only
need to know how to differentiate
functions in one variable really yes
why doesn't cosine go away in which one
in this one well let's let's suppose
instead of this you had five times five
times e to the Y then the derivative
would still be five e to the Y right or
any other constants would just show up
as a scale as the world factor so in the
event the scalar the constant is cosine
X right that's what I mean when I say we
treat X as a parameter if we treat X as
a parameter its treated as a number and
so any expression involving X like
cosine X is a fixed number so it just
shows up as an extra factor any other
question okay so next I would like to
explain the geometric meaning of this
because as you as you see in this in
this course algebra and geometry go
hand-in-hand and all of these other
concepts that we discussed algebraically
they have geometric interpretation which
is very important so for functions in
one variable the derivative of the
function has to do with the slope right
of the tangent line in one variable
derivative gives the slope
over tangent line to the graph and the
way we draw it is like this we have have
a we have XY plane we have a function f
of X we have y equals f of X with a
graph note again that Y here I have a
totally different meaning than Y in here
Y in here is is the second variable so
it's on equal footing with X x and y are
two independent variables but now I'm
talking about functions in one variable
so there is only one variable x and y is
not a variable it's actually it denotes
the value of the function I already
talked about this it's an unfortunate
choice of notation but that's how it is
so I'm not going to change it so we pick
a point let's say x equals a and we draw
a tangent line draw a tangent line and
we know that the derivative let's say
the angle is Theta that the tangent of
theta is the derivative F prime of a
right that's the geometric meaning of
the derivative functions in one variable
so then it's natural to ask what is the
meaning for functions in two variables
to understand that we have to look at
the graph of the function in two
variables what does that look like well
for a function in one variable a graph
is a curve on the plane and I already
talked about many times why why do we
need a plane because to represent a
graph you have to to have your variables
and you have to throw in one additional
variable which will represent the value
of the function for function two
variables there are already two
variables to begin with and with the
draw graph we have
throw in one more one more variable
which will represent the value of the
function so if the result the graph will
function in two variables is going to
live in three-dimensional space so it
will have coordinates XY and Z will have
coordinates XY and Z and we will have a
graph of this function which will be a
surface so I would like to just draw to
just draw part of it which lives in the
first octant on the plane this
coordinate system breaks break the plane
into four quadrants
four corners which are called quadrants
right because there four of them in
space the coordinate planes coordinate
planes break the entire
three-dimensional space into eight
pieces which are called octant
so this is one oxen which is looking at
us like this
and so the graph actually lives
everywhere but I have just drawn the
intersection of the graph with each of
the each of the coordinates lines and so
you should think of this if it's
something like a like a dome like a
sphere like part of us here it's not
necessarily sphere I'm just just like
this is not a circle I mean I'm just I'm
just doing a sample a sample graph and
to emphasize this I want to pick on show
a particular point on this so let's say
I take this point and so this point has
coordinates to find the coordinates I
have to drop perpendicular on the XY
plane so that's going to look like this
right and then
that's the that's the z-coordinate maybe
a little little higher so this point is
what is this point so this point has
coordinates X a and B and the third
coordinate is the value of the function
because it lives on this yellow on this
yellow surface I don't I don't want to I
don't want to shade it because otherwise
it will not be clear what am i shading
am i shading this or am i shaking the
plane and so on so I'm just trying to
just try to imagine that there is
something here which looks like a part
of us here and that's that's the point
which it belongs to it and that's graph
of a function f of X Y so it's defined
by the equation v equals f of X Y ok and
this is a particular point let's call T
which has coordinates a B these are
given its are given this adjust the
values of x and y and what about the D
coordinate well since its graph the Z
coordinate has to be f of a of of the x
and y coordinates so that means that I
have F of a B and here you want to be
consistent I should put it in riddles so
that's what this point is so this is
this is an F of a T is it clear so far
ok so now what is the slope what is the
slope of the graph well first of all
it's not the slope of the graph it's a
slope of the tangent line so here
actually it doesn't make sense to talk
about the tangent tangent line to the
graph because the line is
one-dimensional and the graph is
two-dimensional how can it be how can
can it not be two-dimensional if we have
function in two variables function one
variables will have a graph which is a
curve but function in two variables has
gravity the surface is two-dimensional
so it doesn't make sense to talk about a
tangent line unless we make some choices
give some additional information so in
fact the proper notion here is the
tangent plane and this is something
we'll talk about on Thursday okay so
that's really ultimately what we would
like to understand is the analog of this
picture in two dimensions and the fool
to get the full analog of this picture
we should really talk about the tangent
plane okay but for now I have a more
limited goal I want to illustrate the
concept of partial derivatives and when
I talked about partial derivatives I
said that I free is one of the two
variables and then I basically go back
to the one-dimensional case to the case
of function one variable so that's what
I would like to do I don't want to talk
immediately about the tangent plane the
entire tangent plane I want to see what
I get when I free is one of the
variables so in my algebraic calculation
on that board I first rows the second
variable Y so what happens if I free is
why my face Y it means that I look at
the part of the graph which has a fixed
y-coordinate namely B so it means that I
cracked this graph I cut this graph with
the plane which is y equals B so the
result it's going to look something like
this so the blue this blue is the
intersection with the plane
y equals B that's what I did
okay so now instead of instead of a
surface I get a curve this intersection
is actually a curve because now Y is
frozen Y is equal to B and so it's out
of the game so the game now is between X
and D and it's the same game it's a game
same game as a game for functions in one
variable right so in fact I can draw I
[Applause]
can draw this curve as a at the graph
for the function one variable X which I
get by substituting y equals B this is
by the way the function which I called G
of X on that board so let me draw this
so now as I said I only have X and V
variables remaining and this blue curve
is going to look like I'm going to look
like this and of course it continues
somewhere but since I didn't draw it on
the big picture I'm not going to draw it
much beyond beyond the first quadrant it
would be tempting to draw it here I know
you might be wondering why am i drawing
like this and not like this but the
point is you have to look at it not from
this angle but from from the back of the
blackboard where X and Z become the
oriented coordinate system you should I
mean you have to turn this you have to
turn this coordinate system like this 90
degrees in this way so that to make the
X 2 go to the right and V go to go
vertically up go up right if you if I
look like this it would be X will go
here so I don't want this right I want
to look I want to look like this and
that's what I will see if I turn it this
is all this is what I will see so this
is in fact the graph this is the graph
of what I call G of X which is obtained
by taking f of X B it is part of the
surface which is the graph of the entire
function but I have frozen one of the
variables so I actually was able to
reduce my problem to the problem of
function one variable I get a fun a
graph of function one variable namely Z
equals G of X and now I calculate I can
calculate for the value of x equal to a
I can calculate the slope of the tangent
line right so let me draw the tangent
line wide so there is this tangent line
and it has a slope and the tangent of
the slope is the derivative G Prime at
the point a which is what we call the
first partial derivative of a function f
at the point a B you see what I mean I
have I'm doing geometrically here
precisely what I did algebraically on
this board algebraically I freeze one of
the variables I get function one
variable is called G of X and then
differentiate it at X equal a and now
I'm doing the same genetically freezing
the second variable means intersecting
the graph with the plane y equals B then
I'm down to two variables I can look at
it as a graph of function one variable
and then I look at the tangent line to
this graph at this point and I measure
the slope of this tangent line the slope
is is that derivative which we were
looking for namely the partial
derivative with respect to X any
questions okay
so let me draw it now on this word so
the tangent line that I drew over there
is going to look like this right that's
the tangent line it's not the entire
tangent plane it's it's one line on that
tangent plane if you think of the
tangent plane at this doesn't want to
turn I didn't know that they'd had some
knobs things to play with if this is a
tension plane then I have drawn just one
line on it and that's the line of
intersection with the XY plane maybe
it's better like this
if you think of the knot the XY plane
sorry it's really it's it's a plane y
equals B if you think of the y equal B
plane as this vertical kind of vertical
plane then that's the tangent line that
I got so this green plane is not is not
yet on the picture I have not drawn it
yet I have only drawn this and so now
I'm going to draw the second one so
that's my point that that's my point
yellow and now I will talk about the
second tangent line which corresponds to
the other freezing the other variable so
this is lit corresponds to y equals B
and this corresponds to x equals a so I
intersect now with with with the plane x
equals a okay and I'm going to use I'm
going to use a different color for this
so it's going to be something like this
okay
and now so this is a this is so the red
the red curve is the intersection with
the plane x equals a with intersect
intersection with the plane x equals a
so I drew it on that so x equals a would
be like this right so that so so so
what's the tangent line to this well
this already looks like tangent line but
I want to erase this part so we don't
get confused sometimes that this second
tangent line is going to look like this
and that's the second white line which
is I drew on that board so if you want
the tangent line would look like this
this is a tangent plane the tangent
plane is spanned by both of this line
both of these tangent lines so the
tangent plane is the green board right
but I cannot I cannot put it there so so
think of the graph as being a kind of as
part of a sphere which is just below
just below this plane so that the planes
just touches it just the tangent 1/2
tangent plane to this graph but on the
tangent plane I can clearly distinguish
two lines one of them corresponds to the
intersection with Y will be playing
another one with X equal a plane when I
intersect with those planes I get
pictures just like this
this is the first one and here's the
second one in the second one I on I have
two variables left also but those
variables are y&z because I have fixed a
X now X is equal to a but y remains a
free variable so I'm talking about this
red this red curve and this red curve
looks like this
well the way I have drawn it it looks
almost identical blue and the red but I
just did it to simplify the picture of
course in general they're going to be
totally different and on on this on this
curve I pick the value of y equal B so
this is my yellow maybe emphasize I
forgot to put the yellow on that slice
right there anyway I'm sure you
understand it and then the tangent line
is here and then maybe let's call this
theta prime the tangent of this theta
prime ah maybe I should say that this is
a graph this is a V equals H of H of Y
where which is f of a Y and the tangent
is a derivative H prime of B which is f
Y of a B so this line this tangent line
is the time I have drawn I have drawn
here the tangent line to the red to the
red curve on the on the graph so that's
the picture so to summarize this in the
case of one variable
you only have one derivative and that
one derivative corresponds to the slope
of the tangent line to to the point to a
given point in two variables
have a tangent plane and what partial
derivatives give you they give you the
slopes of two tangent lines which belong
to this plane namely the lines which are
obtained like to visualize the two lines
which are obtained by intersecting the
tangent plane with the plane y equal B
or the plane X equal a right that's the
idea so we just kind of look at from two
different angles we look at this tangent
plane from two different angles and what
we get is two different lines and once
we get lines you can talk about slopes
you cannot talk about the slope of a
whole plane plane doesn't have a slope
lines have slopes and so so there are
sort of two independent slopes that we
can talk about one respect to X and one
respect to Y and they create point to
the two partial derivatives one respect
to X in one respect to Y ok any
questions yes yeah not a good notation
because prime is for derivative what's
good killed I just wanted to I wanted to
distinguish from the other trace data I
want to make sure it's not the same as
that data but putting prime is like the
worst possible notation because in each
prop and it looks like I'm taking
derivative of theta which I'm not or
even better to call it something else
epsilon alpha that's a good compromise
Greek but not epsilon or delta which are
which are taboo okay
so what else can we do in the case of in
the case of a function in the case of a
function in in one variable we can also
take further derivatives with we can we
don't have to take this one derivative
we can take the second derivative third
derivative and so on right
so it's natural to ask whether we can do
something similar for functions in in
two variables and the answer is yes we
can also take for example second
derivative so in other words we start
with the function f of x and y and then
we can take the first derivative with
respect to X and we can take the respect
to Y so we got no two new functions
which I give you I'll give you an
example of this you know for a
particular case of F so both of them are
also functions in two variables so we
can again apply the same procedure and
do partial derivatives for these
functions then if we if we go this way
we obtain FXX of XY what do I mean by
this I mean that I take F of F sub X
this function and I take the derivative
respect to X one more time that means
again freezing Y and then taking the
respect to X okay if I go this way I get
f YY of XY which means I take F Y the
roots to where spec to Y and then I take
the respect to Y one more time but of
course I can also do mixed mixed
derivatives for example here I can
take this and I can take the derivative
of this vector Y so that I will denote
of X x y of X Y that means taking first
this is the greatest with respect to X
and then respect to Y but I can also do
F Y X which is first respect to Y and
then respect to X and then of course the
credential question is whether I get the
same answer if I apply these derivatives
in two different order
the question is whether this are
actually equal and in my example
[Applause]
in my example but see if I remember I
think it was pencil X 1 X to the 5 what
was it
X Y cube plus cosine X into the Y right
so so what will be so let me write f of
X Y so then the derivative with respect
to X was 5 X to the 4 plus plus y cube
minus sine X e to the Y if I do one more
derivative I get 20 X cube now Y cube is
a constant and the function of X Y the
parameter so it doesn't depend on X
therefore its derivative which vanishes
so disappears then I take one more
derivative of sine I get cosine cosine X
times e to the Y on the other hand I can
take the respect to Y I get 3 XY squared
plus cosine X e to the Y one more
derivative 6 XY plus cosine X e to the Y
and now the most interesting thing I can
track of where we are so first we take
the rate for this with respect to Y this
disappears this becomes 3 y squared
minus sine X e to the Y so that's this
way and if I go this way I'm sorry not
this way this way I get the same right I
get three Y squared
and I think this with respect to X minus
sign an e to the Y so clearly I get the
same answer so that's actually general
result which is called Claro or a guess
to pronounce is the French the French
accent it will be Claro Claro theorem
which says that under favorable
conditions which is essentially the
condition that in a small neighborhood
in small neighborhoods of a given point
you have all partial derivatives which
are continuous functions up to the
second order under its favorable
conditions the the tool the tool makes
derivatives as I say so this is in fact
kleros theorem under some conditions of
continually can teach which will in our
in all our examples it will be satisfied
so this is actually great because what
it means is that if you if you think of
a way of doing partial derivatives for
function two variables at this plane
where if you go this way you
differentiate with respect to X and if
you go this way you differentiate back
to Y right you could do that you could
continue this picture I can go one more
step will be like fxxx
right or I could go this way and it will
be F X X Y always the last one the new
one is the last one and then if I go
more you know it will be for example X Y
X but the point is that it doesn't
matter in which order you take what
matters how many times you differentiate
at X and how many times you
differentiated Y so for instance f YX is
equal to is equal to F X Y but likewise
F XY X the same as f x XY the same
f y XX again under favorable conditions
when functions in question are
continuous in differentiable so all that
matters is not the order but but the
number of times you differentiate with
respect to x and y it's kind of nice so
it has the same commutative structure as
the structure that you have for for the
variables x and y themselves in fact
differentiation is in some sense the
process which is opposite to the process
of multiplication by X or Y so you have
two operations of multiplication by x
and y but you also have two operations
of differentiation by X and by Y and
multiplication by X and welcome you can
use movement to multiplications commute
and two derivatives also commute which
by the way actually been a kind of a
better notation for the separation
because now for now the operation is
denoted by inscribing this additional
subscript next to the function but there
is another notation so I go back through
to the to this this is our notation but
the Nano notation is V F DX like this
also if you will if you wish at a B but
you don't doesn't have to be okay and
likewise the notation for the second
derivative is DF dy
so this is a particular this is particle
notation this is not this should not be
confused this should not be confused
with the straight G with just a straight
letter G it's not the same
in fact this actually makes sense which
I will explain as I've explained on
Thursday I will finally explain what DX
means but this by itself doesn't make
any sense
let's make sense v VF g DX is the
procedure which you can apply to a
function you apply to a function it
gives you it's partial first partial
derivative this is a operation which we
know in the case of one variable we just
denote by prime also in the case of one
variable we write in the case of one
variable we write if you have f of X you
write f prime of X or you write DF DX
but now we cannot write like this as I
will explain in more detail on Thursday
you have to differentiate you have to
specify in which direction you
differentiate and this is one way to do
it say you choose to differentiate with
respect to the X direction and you get
this but this is not to say the
numerator by itself doesn't make any
sense as a notation and the denominator
also doesn't make any sense
only these two things together makes
sense this is a notion of partial
derivative and likewise you have the
notion of partial derivatives back to Y
which makes any function into its
derivative with respect to Y after that
this is f sub y ok based on their hand
DF is an entire different object the
differential
this is entirely different object it's
called the differential and it's not the
same likewise it's not it's not the DF
so this is not even it's not even a
letter if you think about it it's not
even a letter of any reasonable alphabet
it's just nothing it's just a
mathematical notation for partial
derivative so this of course there is
the question as to what is the
differential what is the differential
and what on earth does this mean because
this is something we've been using quite
a lot but never really
we've never read spelled out what we
mean by this but actually it has a very
precise meaning differential and DX and
dy and this is what we are going to
discuss next
in fact so I have about five minutes
left so I'll give you a little preview
of what's coming on Thursday and it's
really very important that's a very
important subject which unfortunately
has been made really really obscure by a
very unfortunate choice of notation the
very best notation makes it very obscure
and very difficult to understand so I
remember when I was learning this for
the first time it was impossible to
understand so it took me a long time to
figure it out and now but I'm happy to
share it with you I'm have to tell you
because it's actually very it's actually
very simple and we already know
everything that we need to know about
this so what I want to do is just tell
you just a little bit just a couple of
things about it and I will as always as
always I will start with function one
variable because that's already a very
very good example where you can
understand what the differential is and
what what all this notation is so in
fact I shouldn't I shouldn't have erased
it because I'm going to draw it again
but I just wanted to draw in a slightly
different way I never anymore the way I
usually draw which is
kind of this is an optimist view of of
realities it goes up you know the other
ones down so I can that's why I raised
it so so we talk about tangent lines and
with over the importance of tangent
lines and the importance of tangent line
really is that it gives you very useful
approximation to a complicated function
on a very small scale okay so the
differential that Forenza is really easy
the function whose graph the tangent
line is so the funny thing is that we
talk about a function in one variable so
in this case let's say you have a
function f of X in this yellow this
yellow curve represents the graph of
this function that is the set of
solutions of the equation y equals f of
X so for this function we have two
objects we have the function named F and
we have the graph which is the yellow
curve we have two objects and then we
talk about the tangent line and tangent
line we can of course we understand
dramatically very clearly we choose the
particular point so let's say X is zero
right
but we never talk about the function
which gives us this tangent line is a
graph but somehow we don't we kind of
ignore we usually ignore this question
so the yellow curve the yellow curve is
the graph of this function and but the
tangent line is also graph of a function
by the much simpler function which is
actually a linear function and what this
function is it is a differential this
one is the graph also graph of function
function namely yeah that's what this is
what we mean by DF working rather than
Wars namely the differential
differential over f at this point
that's what differential is the only
title point is that for the differential
we shift the coordinate that we choose a
new coordinate system where the origin
is at our point that's all
in other words with you now this line is
a graph with respect to a new coordinate
system where the origin is not here it's
not at some arbitrary point but actually
at the point which we are analyzing and
if you write down the function whose
graph this tangent line is you will have
precisely the differential that's how it
works for functions in one variable and
now it's absolutely clear what will
happen for functions in two variable for
functions in two variable we are going
to look at the tangent plane to this to
the graph which is which is represented
here or if you wish that's the tangent
plane which I was talking about and then
you will think of the tangent plane also
it's a graph of a function of a linear
function and that linear function is a
differential of a function into the
he started with so that's the short that
the short version of this and I will
give you more details on Thursday